♪
Previously on
Strange New Worlds...
M'BENGA:
Years ago, I was stationed
on the moon of J'Gal.
ROR'QUEG:
If you had served on J'Gal,
you'd be dead.
We both served
in the Klingon War.
A hundred million
Federation bodies, slaughtered.
-What does this mean?
-I don't know.
Shut up.
Learn when to leave
people alone, Spock.
Sorry. I'm working on that.
CHAPEL:
You sure you want
to do this again?
M'BENGA:
Again? No.
[exhales slowly]
[grunting]
The war is over, Joseph.
Yes, but how can it ever be?
PIKE:
Captain's Log stardate 1875.4.
TheEnterprise has arrived
at the Prospero system
for a rendezvous with
theKelcie Mae
in order to pick up
a special visitor.
Prospero has been under
Starfleet jurisdiction
since the end
of the Klingon War.
After years of infighting,
all three planets
have finally reached
a cease-fire agreement,
negotiated by
a unique Federation ambassador.
Enterprise has been tasked with
transporting the ambassador
to Starbase 12.
Our orders are
to make him feel welcome.
However...
our esteemed guest is a Klingon,
a former general
who defected to our side.
Most of my crew
didn't fight in the war,
but some did.
[boatswain's whistle blows]
PIKE:
Ambassador Dak'Rah,
Son of Ra'Ul, it is my honor
to welcome you aboard
the USS Enterprise.
It's just Rah.
Formal Klingon names
are a mouthful.
What is that peculiar device?
Ah, the boatswain's whistle.
An old Earth custom
from the time of ships at sea.
It's become somewhat of
a tradition here on Enterprise
for our
most distinguished guests.
Uh, I see.
Kind of like
rolling the red carpet out?
[chuckles] Yes.
Yes, exactly like that.
We want to extend every courtesy
the ship has to offer.
-Mm.
-My head of security
is ready
to escort you to quarters.
Captain Christopher Pike,
if you wouldn't mind,
I've heard so many great things
about the Federation flagship.
Could I trouble you for
a brief tour of the ship?
The Summit of Scorpi Ten,
the Klingon
Free-Trade Agreement,
negotiating the Perez Accords.
Sure, he's done some stuff.
UHURA:
He's an effective voice
in spreading Starfleet's
message for unity.
A former enemy
speaking on our behalf?
It's incredible.
Or it's a long con to gain
access to Federation secrets.
[sighs]
Just because he's Klingon...
Trust me, I know Klingons.
This guy with the peace
treaties, that's not Klingon.
So you don't trust
Ambassador Rah
because he believes in peace?
That's not what... Mm.
Ha ha.
The slaughter at Lembatta Five.
The siege at Starbase Zetta.
Athos...
[Ortegas sighs]
I didn't mean to hit a nerve.
It's okay. You're right.
I don't really know
what he's about.
All I know is the stories,
like that he killed his own men
to cover his retreat.
There's a reason other Klingons
call him the Butcher of J'Gal.
Captain on the bridge.
What an amazing view.
A Bird-of-Prey isn't built
to take in its surroundings.
Klingons will never admit it,
but the Federation
has much better ships.
Well, our ships are designed
primarily for exploration.
Ah, but this one,
-I bet, is fun to fly.
-[chuckles]
Lieutenant Erica Ortegas here is
our senior officer at the helm.
A beautiful ship, Lieutenant.
And I'm sure it's in good hands.
Thank you, sir. I do my best.
Captain, may we continue
the tour?
I don't want to distract your
bridge crew from their duties.
As you were.
This one's cold.
It is a simple matter of coding.
We will have ample time
to work out the inconsistencies
before presenting this
to the ambassador.
Not as much time as you think.
My science officer has been
preparing a small surprise
to make you feel more at home.
Mr. Spock?
Ambassador Rah, it is an honor.
In anticipation of your visit,
we are attempting to produce
a popular caffeinated beverage
from Kronos.
UNA:
On a recent mission,
Spock was able to parley
with a Klingon captain
and procure a recipe.
I must admit, it has
ignited a curiosity in me,
a desire to experience
more of your culture.
There's nothing to experience.
They're a warmongering race
limited by ideology.
I have breached
a complicated subject.
Please accept my apology.
No, no, no. I... apologize.
My distaste for the past
colors my words.
No, I appreciate
this kind gesture,
and I would love to try
the raktajino.
[beeping]
[bell dings]
[chuckles]
-Ah!
-[gasps]
[growls]
I think perhaps
we should let this cool a bit.
We are still
working out the coding.
-This is entirely my fault.
-I'm fine.
One good thing about Klingons,
we have
a high tolerance for pain.
Still, if you would indulge me.
Right this way, ambassador.
Our dermal regenerator
will patch that up in no time.
It will be good as new.
♪
I'll handle this.
[indistinct chatter]
MAN:
General Dak'Rah.
[explosions, weapons firing]
[panting]
-[explosions, weapons firing]
-General Dak'Rah.
[heart pounding]
[breathing heavily]
PIKE:
Space.
The final frontier.
These are the voyages
of the starshipEnterprise.
Its five-year mission:
to explore strange new worlds...
...to seek out new life
and new civilizations,
to boldly go
where no one has gone before.
♪
WOMAN:
Roger, shuttlecraft 12648.
-You're clear for descent.
-POLK: Copy, I've got approach.
Taking her down
around the east side,
approaching from the south.
POLK:
Lowering blast shields.
CHAPEL:
Where are the landing pads?
POLK:
It's too hairy down there,
so we drop you in transit.
It's the safest way
to get you on the ground.
-[explosions]
-[alarm blaring]
FOB's a mile from the front,
so don't wander out.
Good luck down there.
♪
[explosions continue
in distance]
BUCK:
Christine Chapel.
Welcome to J'Gal.
Commander Martinez, thank you.
-Everyone calls me Buck.
-Okay.
Whatever you need,
we probably don't have it,
but ask anyway.
I'll run it up the flagpole
and see if it quacks.
-Right. Sounds good.
-You could also ask Joseph.
Uh, Joseph?
I'm the Chief Medical Officer,
but Joseph,
he does a lot around here.
Watch your feet.
Oh, that reminds me.
We do not have
an internal organ regenerator.
I keep putting in requests,
but apparently a watched pot
doesn't get the oil.
This needs to be scrubbed.
-Right away, Buck.
-Uh, where's the head nurse?
-I should report in.
-You haven't heard?
Congratulations,
Head Nurse Chapel.
Me? I just got here.
Well, you have
the most experience
of anybody on the staff.
We couldn't wait
for roster rotations,
so I did what I had to do
to get you assigned.
Cost me a case of Romulan ale.
[explosion]
Did we just take fire?
You get used to it.
We scramble sensors,
but the Klingons
know we're here.
It's only a matter of time
before they get a lock on us.
[distant weapon fire continues]
We call it Tent City.
I think you see why.
It's not home, but it'll do.
You've been assigned Echo 25.
It's down there somewhere.
Uh, I'll put down my things
and get started right away.
Enjoy your downtime.
See a show.
You'll figure out the rest.
Who's that?
That's Joseph.
-[alarm blares]
-COMPUTER: Incoming transport.
Incoming transport.
Bills and bows, people!
Bills and bows! Let's go!
-[urgent chatter]
-[alarm blaring]
Let's go!
You're late!
COMPUTER:
Incoming transport.
Burns. Um, this way.
COMPUTER:
Incoming transport.
Get him to surgery.
[urgent chatter continues]
-Treat him for shock.
-Yes, Doctor.
COMPUTER:
Incoming transport.
Nurse, over here.
Look after these two.
Doctor! I need a doctor!
Hey, buddy, what's your name?
-Stay with me.
-Alvarado.
Alvarado. Excellent.
He needs immediate attention.
COMPUTER:
Incoming transport.
M'BENGA:
Internal bleeding,
massive damage
to every major organ.
-Let's prep him.
-No regenerator.
Right. So, what, we just...
A morphine drip and let him die?
COMPUTER:
Incoming transport.
We need to get him off the pad.
If we don't,
more people will die.
When the convoy gets here,
the starships
will have a surgery bay.
Just hang tight, Alvarado, okay?
We need to do something.
Load his pattern
into the buffer.
We can keep him
suspended in there
-until the starships arrive.
-You can do that?
-Show me.
-I do it all the time
with the bad ones.
Load the bio-data
as a backlog
with a pending transport.
Once he's in,
delete the transport.
We can recall the backlog later.
Just hold on.
COMPUTER:
Incoming transport.
M'BENGA:
Chief Medical Officer's Log,
USSEnterprise,
stardate 1875.8.
Biobed two has shut down again.
Ever since the Gorn attack
at Finibus Three,
it hasn't been the same.
Dr. M'Benga.
Chris.
Do you have any more
of that Deltan parsley
in your apothecary?
Careful.
Deltan parsley is deadly
in excessive amounts.
And in small amounts, delicious.
[chuckles softly]
You could have just called.
Or sent a yeoman.
Mm-hmm. I wanted
to check in with you.
Because of our Klingon visitor?
I know you and Chapel
were both stationed on J'Gal,
where Rah earned his reputation.
Apparently, there was...
a minor protest
during his last transport,
so we have direct orders.
Klingon War veterans
need to interact with Rah.
We have to make him
feel welcome here,
and we will,
but I don't want that
to come at the personal expense
of anyone on the crew.
I'm fine.
As for Chapel...
PIKE:
Oh. Hey.
All good here, too, Captain.
Great. Good to hear it.
Ultimate goal of the Federation
is to make peace
with our enemies.
True, but it's also
an organization
that waged war
with the Klingons.
As I mentioned, we have orders
from pretty up high.
I'm hosting a dinner tonight
in honor of Ambassador Rah.
It would mean a lot...
I'll be there.
Totally. Me, too.
Thank you.
I appreciate you both
being there.
See you tonight.
Great.
[Chapel exhales shakily]
-We can still ditch this.
-No.
Chris needs us there.
I've handled worse
than polite conversation.
Plus...
...I don't want to give Rah
the satisfaction
of chasing me away
from the captain's table.
Joseph.
We got this.
[echoing]:
Dermal team!
[heart monitor beeping steadily]
[flatline tone]
He's in cardiac arrest.
We're losing him.
-Manual stimulation.
-What?
Grab his heart
and start pumping.
It's not working.
Eyes up. We got this.
We got this.
Say it with me.
-We got this.
That's right.
Continue stimulation.
[heart monitor beeping steadily]
He's back!
Dermal team, now!
-[alarm blaring]
-COMPUTER: Incoming transport.
Incoming transport.
BUCK:
Bills and bows, people!
Bills and bows! Let's go!
WOMAN [over P.A.]:
Attention, all personnel.
Tactical reviews
have been updated
and are available
on your personal datapad.
M'BENGA:
Erica.
Everything all right?
No. The Butcher of J'Gal
is in there,
and everyone's acting like
he's the freaking Dalai Lama.
I've got a bad poker face
when I don't like someone.
I need to bail.
Why didn't you just
tell the captain no?
Why didn't you?
There's a chance General...
...Ambassador Rah
has genuinely reformed.
No, he's pretending.
I sense it,
and I don't want to play along.
Sometimes you pretend
something long enough...
...it becomes the truth.
So let's pretend
the war doesn't bother us,
at least for tonight.
Put on the Starfleet face?
It's a good face.
Plus, Pike made jambalaya.
Ooh, jambalaya?
With Deltan parsley.
[sighs]
RAH:
There were eight delegates
from three separate planets,
and everyone thought
I was crazy.
-And maybe I am.
-[laughter]
The ally ambassador must have
many interesting insights
on delicate matters
of diplomacy.
UNA:
Why did the Federation
send you there alone?
PIKE:
Joseph, Erica, welcome.
Uh, you met
our helmsman earlier,
and this is our CMO,
Dr. M'Benga.
The honor is all mine.
Ambassador.
I hope you're enjoying our ship.
-Christine?
-What?
Oh, you're doing
the word game. Um...
I'm sorry, I don't really
have one right now.
-You are under duress.
-Hmm?
Oh. Yeah.
[laughter]
Is it true that
all peace negotiations
must include
drinking bloodwine in excess?
Peace is not a destination.
It's a journey.
It's a state of mind.
The Klingon need to feel...
SPOCK:
Quite understandable.
I do not know much about
your service in the war, but...
I am available to you if you
ever feel the need to share.
Yeah, I don't, so let's just
change the subject, yeah?
RAH:
Convincing Prospero Alpha
to agree to an armistice
was like getting a Tellarite
-to give a compliment.
-[laughter]
CHAPEL:
I just wish he would shut up
for one second
about all this amazing peace
he's managed.
I can help with that.
ORTEGAS:
He's not wrong.
I was stationed near Prospero.
They are pretty stubborn.
They are stubborn. Correct.
-Often badly.
-Ambassador Rah,
are you familiar with
the ancient Earth text
Sun Tzu's The Art of War?
A most inspired
human masterpiece.
I would love to hear
your views on its comparison
with the Klingon manuscript
mL' parmaq Qoj.
This is a most excellent topic
of conversation,
Mr. Spock. Yes.
All Klingon children
learn mL' parmaq Qoj
practically from birth.
I was introduced
when I was seven.
My father taught me
war and bloodshed,
but my mother taught me
to see and feel...
[conversation continues
indistinctly]
Better make that two.
-Mine's a double.
-Even better.
Why are we here?
You know why.
Our captain needs us.
Why is it so hard to explain
to people who weren't there?
[distant explosions]
General Dak'Rah.
-His men wouldn't let me die.
-That was then.
Now you're here.
Got it?
Focus on getting better.
How's your chest feeling?
Like someone squeezed my heart
with their fingers.
Someone did.
Where are you from, Ensign?
New Angeles.
Terra Luna?
You're a long way
from the shipyards.
We all just call it the Moon.
I have to go
check on other patients.
When I come back, I want to hear
more about the Moon.
The answer is no.
And tell them
to stop sending people.
Nobody sent me.
In fact, they said
you'd turn me down if I tried.
Good.
We're done here.
General Dak'Rah, son of Ra'Ul.
I need help taking him out.
Intel says he's head
of the house here on J'Gal,
running the entire operation
for the Klingons.
M'Benga,
they're killing civilians.
Human and Klingon,
it doesn't matter.
This General Dak'Rah,
he's ordering his men
to kill on sight
anyone that isn't
a Klingon soldier.
After they torture them.
What are you doing,
hiding behind the wire?
Everyone knows the stories.
The most
hand-to-hand kills confirmed.
I'm just a doctor now.
I prefer saving lives
to taking them.
And I need quick and silent.
I need you.
I gave you my answer.
Protocol 12.
It was discontinued.
Starfleet won't make it anymore,
but I heard you still have some.
-You heard wrong.
-You designed it, right?
Make more.
Even if I could, I wouldn't.
It turns out that
pumping your body
full of adrenaline
and pain inhibitors
is bad for your health.
I'd rather die tomorrow
than today.
Come on, be reasonable.
My team needs an edge.
RAH:
The negotiations
almost fell apart
when the chancellor said to me,
"How is it that a Klingon
is speaking on behalf
of the Federation?"
[Pike chuckles]
That's a good question.
How did you respond?
I simply told him the truth.
Who I am and who I was.
And what the Federation
did for me.
It saved my life.
J'Gal changed me.
J'Gal changed a lot of us.
You were on J'Gal?
I was.
The final conflict.
And the massacre
of Colony Athos.
RAH:
Then you both know my pain
all too well.
Those were difficult times.
After what happened on Athos,
my ideals shifted.
The fighting was without merit.
It was pointless.
War is never the ideal option.
Is it true?
The story about
what you had to do to escape?
We were all pushed
to our limits.
To the survivors of J'Gal.
[speaks Klingon]
"We are Klingon, may we endure"?
"Remain Klingon."
Remember that?
It was our battle cry
during the war.
"Remain Klingon" is much easier
to shout in our language.
[repeats Klingon phrase]
"Remain Klingon,"
all over the comms,
and then... [clicks tongue]
Boom. All your friends are dead.
Lieutenant Ortegas, stand down.
Captain?
RAH:
Let us all
step back.
I...
I've heard worse.
Now I am simply hoping
to make up for my past,
and...
and connecting with others
who need healing like you.
[scoffs]
Okay, I am gonna go see
if she needs anything.
My sincere apologies,
Ambassador Rah.
RAH:
None are needed, Captain.
As I said, I bear no grudge.
Uh, sh-she will find
her own way to peace.
UHURA:
Your perspective,
it bears a remarkable similarity
to Aenar existentialism.
RAH:
Yes.
I love the Aenar.
Brilliant pacifists.
Doctor, maybe you should
check on Erica as well.
Chapel might need a hand
calming her down.
Aye, Captain.
Your security officer,
La'An, she tells me that
the two of you are practicing
full impact Mok'bara,
and I was wondering if we might
arrange a session.
I'll check my schedule.
Thank you.
You should be in bed.
What are we doing here, Doc?
Why did you
join Starfleet, Ensign?
To explore.
Learn.
I don't know-- none of the stuff
that I've been doing lately.
I joined to find new ways
of healing people.
With Starfleet, you learn
how the rest of the universe
treats its maladies.
And this war, it's a disease
eating at the heart
of the Federation.
If we let the Klingons conquer
every colony in the sector,
they won't stop.
They won't go back to Kronos.
All of us have to remember
what we love most
about back home.
We fight for them.
We fight hoping
it doesn't change us.
Hoping...
...don't come home different.
But if we don't fight,
we don't win.
The disease takes over.
And none of us
have a home to go back to.
I just wish we could stop this
without all this dying.
We have to fight
so the people we love can have
a chance to live in peace.
That's Starfleet.
-[distant explosions]
-[urgent chatter]
Why are we being briefed?
Lieutenant Va'Al Trask,
special forces.
He just got orders.
For the entire outfit?
I just heard
the whole stinking thing.
You know, for being black ops,
these guys talk super loud.
[laughs]
You don't sound happy.
Command thinks this is our
chance to take control of J'Gal.
Trask's team is going dark
to find the local generals,
while ground units
mount a huge offensive
near Colony Athos
to provide cover.
All they need is meat
for the grinder.
My platoon is
leading the charge.
Fighting is one thing,
but this...
This is the mission, remember?
I don't question orders.
It's a suicide run.
I can put you down
for mandatory convalescence.
-Where's your C.O.?
-Don't.
Forget before.
It was the drugs. I was tired.
Thanks for the patch up job.
Stay low.
Fight hard.
I'm a soldier, Doc.
This is what I do.
Eyes up, people!
We got the word,
and the word is now.
Check the battle plans,
check assignments.
We all know the drill.
SPOCK:
I want to apologize
for my part
in last night's dinner.
You don't need to apologize.
None of this is about you.
You just see me
going through something,
and our closeness
makes you feel responsible.
You're not.
I understand.
That is not true.
I am having difficulty
watching you experience
such obvious distress.
I want to help.
But it would appear all that
I am doing is making it worse.
War, it doesn't leave you. It...
It can, it can bury itself,
but it's-it's always there.
I researched J'Gal.
It was a forward operating base.
The data suggests the loss
of life was disproportionate...
J'Gal is not a statistic, Spock.
J'Gal is what it is.
War, it makes sense
if you've been there,
but it will never make sense.
Like I've been
trying to tell you,
I just need some personal time.
I understand.
You require personal time
away from me.
-[alarm blaring]
-COMPUTER:
Incoming transport.
[people screaming]
-You good?
-No, no, I'm good, I'm good.
-Go, go.
-Incoming transport.
[alarm blaring]
CHAPEL:
Where's all the wounded?
General Dak'Rah
is sending all he's got.
They hit our power supply.
Auxiliary generators are up.
We got a lot people in the field
who can't make it out.
CHAPEL:
All we need
is one transporter, right?
I'm trying to get one
online now.
Use all the auxiliary power,
override the redundant systems,
route everything to the pads.
It'll purge the backlogs,
but it should work. Do it.
Incoming transport.
CHAPEL:
Wait, wait, wait. No, no.
Um, the transport buffer.
Alvarado's in there.
If we purge the logs, he'll die.
Uh...
COMPUTER:
Pattern deleted.
Power restored.
Transport initiated.
No. What did you do?
We saved lives.
[powering up]
Incoming transport.
[echoing]:
I must admit, I thought
you might decline my invitation.
It crossed my mind.
But Klingon Judo
is good exercise.
Are you sure
you're up for full impact?
I am more virile than I appear.
[both grunting]
[panting]
I see there's more to you
than what's on the surface, Rah.
Most people who see me
see a Klingon, bringer of death.
They do not believe
that I am reformed.
No.
You actually seem like
you're able to put
the past behind you.
In fact, you make it look easy.
You don't put something
like J'Gal behind you.
But you learn from it.
RAH:
I have a proposal.
If the two of us, direct
enemies on the battlefield,
can find a way to work together,
that would be
a powerful message.
So you want to be my friend?
We don't need to be friends,
just allies.
[M'Benga groans]
The combat veterans
on this ship,
they look up to you.
And I believe many others
in Starfleet will, too.
Consider joining me
for my next peace conference.
You and I together can advance
Klingon-Federation relations
by leaps and bounds.
[exhales]
You ask a big favor of me,
but I still
want to know about you.
Ask anything you want.
Did you really
kill your own men?
We were under attack.
The leaders under my command
decided that all
tactical options were viable.
Most of the casualties
on Athos were civilians.
I am aware.
And...
yes, I...
...killed my own men
because I was appalled
by those atrocities.
You against
three Klingon warriors.
Impressive.
Who fought the hardest?
[grunting]
[growling]
[shouting]
[grunts, wheezes]
Kiff.
He almost ended me.
But witnessing
so many nameless victims,
I had to fight on.
The nameless?
You did it for them?
I stood up for what is right.
And for that,
my Klingon brethren
call me the Butcher of J'Gal.
J'Gal changed you.
It changed me.
Wars change people.
This has been invigorating.
I look forward
to our next session.
♪
M'BENGA: Computer,
set sonic shower to full.
COMPUTER:
Incoming transport.
-Incoming transport.
-[weapons firing, explosions]
-WOMAN: Over here!
[people screaming]
[grunts]
CHAPEL:
Children.
They're killing children.
I need pediatric
medical assistance.
[explosions
and shouting continue]
Incoming transport.
-[panting]
-Incoming transport.
TRASK:
M'Benga,
they're killing civilians.
[grunts]
[overlapping urgent chatter]
TRASK:
General Gra'val, Commander Kiff,
Captain Ruh'lis
[echoing]:
and General Dak'Rah.
I need quick and silent.
M'BENGA:
It's a massacre.
-They're killing everyone.
-CHAPEL: This is a bloodbath.
M'BENGA:
Entire families.
CHAPEL:
They're killing everyone.
TRASK:
You're the Ghost.
I need you.
♪
Number One.
What's this?
UNA:
A course through
the Chantico Nebula.
Gets us to Starbase 12
by tomorrow.
Chantico?
We need to get Rah
off this ship.
Crew morale is low.
[sighs]
How can we represent
a Federation
that believes in peace if we say
some people aren't allowed
to make up for their past?
I agree with you,
in the abstract,
but the people he hurt,
some of them
right here in this crew,
might not find forgiveness
so easily.
It isn't fair for us to ask them
to just let it go.
Federation or not,
everyone is
on their own journey.
Okay, change course,
cut through Chantico Nebula
and arrive early.
Aye, Captain.
-[distant explosions]
-[weapons firing]
CHAPEL:
People are looking for you.
You're going out there.
Someone has to
finish the mission.
J'Gal is burning.
We're all leaving.
The convoy is warping in.
You can use this to find me.
Don't beam me out
until you have to.
I told myself,
I don't want
to go home different.
My family deserves better.
I see now that's impossible.
Go stop them.
Save as many as you can.
And when you find
whoever's in charge,
you make them pay.
Protocol 12.
It helps you fight.
If the Klingons breach the wire,
use it to get out.
Good luck.
♪
I've just been informed
that my time on the ship
is being cut short.
We don't have
as much time as I had hoped
to get to know one another.
I'm okay with that.
I don't need to know
any more than I already do.
Now...
please go away.
I thought that as victims of
the horrors of J'Gal, that...
Stop!
I know why you're here.
You want me
to make you feel okay.
To say you've done enough.
You misunderstand me.
Oh, I understand you,
General Dak'Rah,
son of Ra'Ul.
Perhaps you do.
I sense that we are the same.
You're letting your pain
cloud your judgment.
Please.
Leave me alone.
Don't let hate ruin your soul.
You gave the order!
Anyone not a Klingon soldier
is the enemy.
You gave the order.
Yes, this is true.
But I've been doing
the best I can
to make up
for my transgressions.
Kiff didn't fight the hardest.
It was Captain Ruh'lis.
He held me back
while you made your escape.
-[blade slicing, stabbing]
-[grunting]
You turned me into a monster.
I told you I was there.
I am the Butcher of J'Gal.
No.
All of this time...
All of this time,
you've said nothing.
You let me take credit.
Because, unlike you,
I am ashamed of that night.
I am ashamed of my cowardice.
I looked for you.
And now here you are,
using the blood on my hands
to make yourself a saint.
I only wanted Starfleet
to trust me.
Look at the work that I've done.
People need saints.
They need belief.
If people knew the truth,
my work would be undone.
Your work is built on lies.
You never paid for what you did.
When I was at my lowest,
the Federation was there.
I need it, and they need me.
I have a purpose now.
Why did you have to come?
Why couldn't you leave me alone?
M'Benga, I'm here
to provide healing.
Please, let me have a chance
to help you heal.
M'BENGA:
I said no.
RAH [grunting]:
Don't be stupid.
M'BENGA [grunting]:
You're a war criminal.
-RAH: Don't you see it?
-M'BENGA: Get your hands off!
RAH:
So selfish a human!
M'BENGA:
Don't!
[exhales weakly]
I was there.
Saw the whole thing.
Rah wanted to talk,
but Joseph was done.
He told Rah he didn't want to be
involved with a war criminal.
Guess hearing that set him off.
I can't believe
he would do something like this.
COMPUTER:
Commander Kiff,
Klingon, deceased.
Captain Ruh'lis,
Ambassador Dak'Rah,
Klingon, deceased.
The knife belongs to
the Butcher of J'Gal, right?
Starfleet records tell us
the DNA belongs to
the three warlords he killed.
And I checked the logs,
tracked movements.
They corroborate the timeline.
I'm just shocked
that Rah would
attack him like that.
I guess it just goes to show,
no one ever really knows
what goes on in anyone's heart.
♪
Joseph.
La'An's submitting her report.
Uh, there's likely
to be an inquiry, but...
Oh, we've known each other...
-How long?
-Too long to count.
Yeah, I'd like to think,
if you did instigate
the fight with Rah,
if it got away from you somehow,
you could talk to me.
I'd be on your side.
We'd work it out.
I didn't start the fight, Chris.
This whole situation, it's...
it's complicated.
Is it?
Rah was living a lie.
I saw his true face.
What if I told you
he murdered children?
Not his men.
He did it.
What if I started
the fight then?
Would that be so bad?
Even if he had secrets,
there's due process.
That's why we have tribunals.
The Diplomatic Corps
knew who he was,
and they still let him
represent the Federation.
The Federation believes everyone
deserves a second chance.
What about justice?
What about the victims?
Doesn't everyone deserve
to pay for their actions?
So who decides, hmm?
Who pays
and who gets redemption?
Where's the line?
[chuckles] You're right, Chris.
We've known each other
for a very long time,
see eye to eye on most things.
But you haven't lived my life.
You have the privilege
of believing in
what's best in people.
Me?
I happen to know there are
some things in this world
that don't deserve forgiveness.
What are you saying?
I told you,
I didn't start the fight.
But I'm glad he's dead.
M'BENGA:
Chief Medical Officer's Log,
stardate 1877.5.
Biobed two is working again.
At least for now.
But I know
it's only a matter of time
before it shuts down again.
Some things break in a way
that can never be repaired.
Only managed.
[electricity crackles]
Captioning sponsored by
CBS
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org